Title: A conversational climate
Date: 2015-07-23 16:16
Category: Post
Slug: discussion-posts
Tags: Sun, Climate, Science
Author: Benjamin Laken
Email: benlaken@gmail.com
Summary: A post based on a discussion thread from Youtube

![](./images/conv_clim.png)

This post differs from my usual fare as it follows the format of an FAQ
of sorts. For me, it is representative of a conversation I have had a
number of times now. I have found that the points raised are usually
asked of me by people of a right-leaning political persuasion with some
background knowledge of climate. But first some brief back-story to
explain how this came about...

Recently the [TOSCA
group](http://lpc2e.cnrs-orleans.fr/~ddwit/TOSCA/TOSCA/Home.html) posted
[a series of short videos on
YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qtRPfc5zKNI), where they
discussed their research in the field of Sun-Earth links for a general
audience. They also re-posted [my
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qtRPfc5zKNI). This ended with the
conclusion that I am *'certain that the hypothesis which states the Sun
is responsible for the majority of recent global warming via a link
between cosmic radiation and clouds, is false'*. (It is interesting to
note that I think most researchers would at this point find this
conclusion obvious and not at all controversial, while a small number
may find it inflammatory.) I also closed by saying that despite this,
there are still many open and interesting questions in the field of
solar-terrestrial research. After gaining a few views, a comment was
posted on the video to which I wrote a reply. There followed a series of
questions and replies, which I thought would be useful to write up here.

I should preface this with the disclaimer that due to the nature of a
free-flowing conversation large parts of this material stray outside my
own area of active research, particularly towards the end. I have also
not posted the original questions verbatim (which you can [read
here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qtRPfc5zKNI)), but rather I have
simplified and shortened them.

#### Q: How can you say you are "certain" that cosmic rays aren't the cause of global warming - I thought certainty was unscientific?

It is true that even our most well-tested hypotheses are only
technically described as theories, not fact. This is down to the nature
of a scientific hypothesis, they can only be disproven or withstand
scrutiny, not positively proven. With this in mind, in my video I end by
saying I am certain that a specific hypothesis has failed. I refer to
the hypothesis that the Sun, via cosmic rays, is a principle driver of
climate and a primary cause of recent climate change (see Svensmark's
'Cosmoclimatology' [paper
here](http://astrogeo.oxfordjournals.org/content/48/1/1.18.extract) to
read this idea in its original form). As the aforementioned hypothesis
is making a testable knowledge claim, it is open to exacting scrutiny
(it is this very quality that makes it a scientific hypothesis). So,
although the scientific method cannot positively prove something, we may
test it and perhaps disprove it. Currently, the hypothesis has failed a
wide range of independent tests and can be considered thoroughly
defunct. So while scientists may not say with definitive certainty they
are sure something is true, they may say if specific claims are not
true! In the same vein we could say we are certain the Flat-Earth
hypothesis has failed.

#### Q: I thought this cosmic ray-global warming hypothesis was a new idea: how can you dismiss it so readily?

The field of Solar-Climate connections is very old (perhaps first
appearing in scientific literature by William Herschel more than 200
years ago). The idea that it is cosmic rays specifically that affect the
Earth's weather is younger however, to my knowledge having been [first
proposed in 1959 by Edward
Ney](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v183/n4659/abs/183451a0.html).
Some of the first suggestions of a mechanism for this link were along
the lines of cosmic-rays induced atmospheric electricity and cloud
droplets ([R.E. Dickinson,
1975](http://figshare.com/articles/Does_Europe_s_wind_respond_to_either_ENSO_or_the_Solar_cycle_/1471639)).
[Sevensmark and Friis-Christensen
(1997)](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364682697000011)
first reported that satellite measurements of clouds showed evidence of
this, to a sufficient degree to explain large portions of global warming
as a natural phenomenon. But, as I discussed in [an open-access
paper](http://www.swsc-journal.org/articles/swsc/abs/2012/01/swsc120049/swsc120049.html)
and [an earlier
post](http://ccrg2013.blogspot.co.uk/2013/04/blog-entry-of-ben-laken-april-2013.html?view=timeslide),
these observations did not hold weight, and over the last approximately
20 years, many researchers have examined this claim through various
independent methods, finding significant problems and null results. I
myself have looked primarily at large-scale satellite observations to
explore this idea (for example
[here](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2011GL049764/abstract;jsessionid=DFB5CE34983D36916606DFB0305E2483.f03t03?wol1URL=/doi/10.1029/2011GL049764/abstract&regionCode=ES&identityKey=1ed243b7-f978-42d9-82a1-f0e0d33fa9d4&isReportingDone=false),
and
[here](http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00306.1)),
which show null results in terms of changes that could be significant to
global warming. Cumulatively, this weight of evidence has led mainstream
climate scientists to reject the idea of a significant cosmic ray cloud
link, as outlined in [Chapter
7](http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg1/WG1AR5_Chapter07_FINAL.pdf)
Section 4.6 (page 613) of the IPCC fifth assessment report.

#### Q: What about the politics of the science and scientists: isn't it true that this is some kind of mainstream climate-cult/conspiracy, wherein people who propose new ideas counter to mainstream views are automatically demonised and painted as 'climate deniers'?

I have only made statements regarding ideas, not people. As far as I am
concerned original thinking, constrained by reason and evidence, and
open discussion should be valued in science. For another perspective on
this field and its denizens, read the very [interesting article by
journalist Paul Voosen](http://www.eenews.net/stories/1059974149). My
statement of certainty regarding the falsehood of the cosmic ray--Global
warming hypothesis is not a political one: it is purely based on
evidence. That is not to say I don't have my own opinions and biases
(like everyone), but in this case the hypothesis has failed numerous
independent tests. That is the only relevant point, and the only reason
for discarding it. The political aspect of this topic is a very
different conversation, and for me the interesting question regarding
the politics of climate science is actually the inverse of the above: it
regards how disproportionate amounts of power, support, and reporting
have been given to the minuscule number of so-called 'climate deniers'.
It is both angering and motivating that for each clear message from the
scientific community the 'deniers' calcified and pushed back, surely
contributing to the delay of meaningful international action, as
described in the book [The Merchants of
Doubt](http://www.merchantsofdoubt.org). (A fact attested to by
[politicians apparent acceptance of
charlatans](http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/17/climate-change-denial-scepticism-republicans-congress)
and [debunked myths](https://www.skepticalscience.com/skepticquotes.php)
as the basis to reject the science of climate change.)

#### Q: But what about the Little Ice age in Medieval Europe: it correlates to a period of unusually low solar activity called a Grand Minimum. Is this not a big hint the Sun is important to climate?

There may well be solar related mechanisms of regional importance worth
investigating, likely related to dynamics. I have even recently done
some work on this myself, regarding 200 years of regional weather
conditions and solar phase. (This is currently under review, and I will
write a blog post on it if/when it is accepted, although you can already
view the work as an [IPython notebook on
figshare](http://figshare.com/articles/Does_Europe_s_wind_respond_to_either_ENSO_or_the_Solar_cycle_/1471639).)
As I mentioned at the end of my video, there is still much work to be
done, and discounting the aforementioned cosmic ray-climate change
hypothesis doesn't close the door on many interesting solar-terrestrial
pathways which may indeed impact regional climate variability. TOSCA has
produced a book, which will be shortly published, summarising the large
body of interdisciplinary work in this field which is ongoing. A key
point however, is that regional climate variability is most certainly
not the same thing as global climate change, for more on this
distinction in relation to solar forcing see [Benestad
2010](http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/5/2/021001/pdf/1748-9326_5_2_021001.pdf).
It essentially means that the interest in the role of the Sun is on
processes that affect regional-scale variability, not global trends.

#### Q: Despite what you have said about the Sun not impacting climate change, isn't it true that Scientists don't understand everything about the climate? And if so, how can they be so sure we should make policy changes?

As made crystal clear by the efforts of the IPCC, the science is settled
and has been for a long time with regard to having sufficient
information for policy makers to go out and make positive changes. (Of
course, this itself is a bit exasperating, as the old joke goes, the
politician stands up and asks *"What if Climate Change is all a hoax and
we make a better world for nothing?"*). Unfortunately, I would say the
clarity of the climate science community, despite earning a Nobel prize,
has proved largely irrelevant. Why is this? Well, perhaps you will think
this cynical, but I would say that the explanation for this failure can
be caricatured thusly: When policy-makers want support for a given
action, they call upon an 'expert' to offer scientific rational. But
inversely, if particular scientific conclusions are contrary to a
desired policy, they will ask their expert source *"is everything about
this understood?"*, to which the scientist will diligently and
invariably answer *"No, of course we don't understand everything"*. This
is just the nature of science, but nuances like that have a habit of
leeching out of a public debate. At this point, the trap is sprung and
the conclusion is *"Well, we simply cant do anything before we can be
100% sure. More research is needed before action can be taken."*. Again,
this is just a simplification, and is only one of many tactics to take
the clarity out of a scientific argument, but it is suitably
illustrative to show that scientific findings alone are often lame to
drive policy changes. These themes are explored in detail in [The
Merchants of Doubt](http://www.merchantsofdoubt.org), and I would
recommend you read it.

#### Q: But what about climate models: I don't believe they are accurate 100 years into the future, and they seem to be doing a bad job now. How can we base policy on models we can't trust?

Well one thing to keep in mind is the models are statistically
projecting future climate states, not predicting future weather. I think
many of them don't capture sub-decade time-scale variability well, such
as that arising from internal oscillations in complex systems. So it
isn't really a big issue to my mind that the model predictions deviate
from observations for what seems to us to be relatively long periods.
(Although I may well be mistaken here, as climate models are not my
field.) They are certainly an imperfect tool, missing,
miss-representing, and are even inherently incapable of reproducing some
processes. But despite that, they are also still the best tool we have
for projecting the future consequences of our emissions. In particular,
we should pay attention to where there is clear agreement between the
models. For example, all models show the majority of surface will warm
significantly over the next century, and experience intense and more
frequent heat-waves.

The real message of the models for me anyway, is not the small details a
century into the future--which depending on the exact parameter may be
quite uncertain--but the message that continued anthropogenic emissions
(and the energy imbalance we have already created) will significantly
alter the climate system in a way that makes it more hostile for human
civilization. This really is bad news for a species that depends on the
current status quo of the climate for agriculture and resource
management.

I imagine that it is the changing probability of extreme events, and
patterns of variability that will be the primary problem for human
civilisation: Years of successive extreme events in key areas for people
and resources, made more likely by anthropogenic climate forcings, will
be far more dangerous to existing global economic social and political
systems than the relatively slow change in global mean conditions a
century from now. (Although the flooding of coastlines and
ocean-acidification will surely take their toll in due course.) The
aforementioned human socio-economic systems have already demonstrated
their fragility and inter-connectedness for example during the recent
global financial crisis: even climatologists studying ENSO must stop and
marvel at the teleconnections that cause a property speculation in the
USA to be linked to global economic shock waves. To my mind at least,
the most immediate global danger of climate change is to add a
potentially destabilising wild card to global socio-economic systems.
Albeit, a wild card that scientists have been clearly warning society
about now for several decades.

As I write the final lines of this post, James Hansen and others have
[just posted in ACPD a
paper](http://www.atmos-chem-phys-discuss.net/15/20059/2015/acpd-15-20059-2015.pdf)
that makes a similar point in far more exacting way, so I will close by
citing a paragraph from their conclusions:

*"Our analysis paints a different picture than IPCC (2013) for how this
Hyper-Anthropocene phase is likely to proceed if GHG emissions grow at a
rate that continues to pump energy at a high rate into the ocean. We
conclude that multi-meter sea level rise would become practically
unavoidable. Social disruption and economic consequences of such large
sea level rise could be devastating. It is not difficult to imagine that
conflicts arising from forced migrations and economic collapse might
make the planet ungovernable, threatening the fabric of civilization."*
