Title: Old Science invigorated with Open Science
Date: 2016-03-24 13:55
Category: Post
Slug: paper_update
Tags: Journals, Open Science
Author: Benjamin Laken
Email: benlaken@gmail.com
Summary: Old Science re-worked with open science

![alt text](./theme/images/banner_old_sci.png "Original image by James
Clarke")

Last November someone e-mailed me a strange request, they wanted to use
a method from [a paper I wrote in
2013](http://www.swsc-journal.org/articles/swsc/full_html/2013/01/swsc130020/swsc130020.html).
Shocking I know. I had included in the paper a link to some IDL code
meant to reproduce the figures, of course, it was already broken. It had
aged badly, inaccessible a full 2 years ahead of [Jeff Rotheberg's
prediction](http://www.clir.org/pubs/archives/ensuring.pdf) (*"digital
information lasts forever â€” or five years, whichever comes first"*).
After digging through my file system and recovering the old script I had
the feeling that if the link not been broken it would probably not have
been of much help. Needless to say, at the time I wrote the paper I
thought the approach I took was great. I didn't know much about coding
then, and I hadn't heard of version control either. Although, to be
fair, no one in the field I was working in talked about these issues or
showed much interest in code. In fact, asking to see peoples code was a
good way to loose friends (*"You don't trust me?"* or *"You want to
steal my work?"*). A few years on, and I now know enough to see that
approach I took was not terribly helpful if the aim was to create
reproducible science.

Driven by examples from a new generation of researchers who break from
the *"publish or perish"* model and instead operate under the *"share
and thrive"* philosophy (people like [Titus
Brown](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/), [Jessica
Hamrick](http://www.jesshamrick.com/blog/), [Wes
Mckninney](http://wesmckinney.com), and [Johnny Wei-Bing
Lin](http://pyaos.johnny-lin.com)), I have invested time into learning
the tools and practices of the Open Science community. Since a lot of
effort went into writing my 2013 paper, and I sincerely wanted people in
my field to adopt the methods it discusses, I committed to the challenge
of re-writing the code, and thinking how to communicate the ideas more
effectively. I decided to mix the (peer-reviewed) original article text,
with re-written Python code and new figures (I had seen such an approach
used before, in a [Bayesian text book written in the
Notebook](http://camdavidsonpilon.github.io/Probabilistic-Programming-and-Bayesian-Methods-for-Hackers/),
which I recommend you have a look at), so I diligently set about trying
to recreate my own work from days past.

As any researcher will tell you, this is a dangerous game, analogous to
the moment just before someone accidentally shoots themselves whilst
cleaning their own gun. This is because scientists are now essentially
programmers, programmers without a background in computer science,
usually without training or assistance of any kind in fact, who
generally don't have code-reviews, write tests, share their code, or
sometimes even understand the nuances of the language they are working
in. (For some discussion on this see the PLOS article [Best practices in
Scientific
Computing](http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.1001745).)
What's more, when they submit papers for review, only the polished
output of these programs is considered, a nice shiny figure with some
significance levels, usually from a black-box statistical routine.
Needless to say there are a great many things that can go awry between
raw data and the shiny figure, and it is a safe bet that many, many bugs
are hiding in the analyses of many, many, papers.

After a few months of working on this project on and off---and
thankfully only finding one minor error in the original code, that
probably doesn't require a retraction---it is ready: A [Jupyter
Notebook](http://jupyter.org), written in Python 3, with interactive
web-based plots (in [Bokeh](http://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/) and
[Plotly](https://plot.ly)), version controlled, and available in a
[Github repo](https://github.com/benlaken/Composite_methods_LC13) (with
all the dependent data). I also included my
[Anaconda](https://www.continuum.io/downloads) environment information,
detailing the required dependencies (and versions) to run the code as it
was intended. And, as a final touch of black-magic, the whole repo can
be run in the cloud via the excellent [Binder
project](http://mybinder.org)! Put another way, anyone can either
[clone](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-clone) the repo and run the code
locally, or they can simply visit the repo and launch a Jupyter session
from Binder's cloud service and explore the code without even having
Python installed on their machines. Fantastic!

Of course, the reason I went to the trouble of investing time in an old
paper is because I think the value of the type of science I am doing
lies in its communication. The easier it is for people to get into the
nuts-and-bolts of what I have done, to play and experiment with these
ideas, the easier it is for them to adapt it to their own work and build
upon it. I feel that I would much rather spend time making sure my old
work does not become useless to the community, rather than simply
steam-roll on towards new research, trying to notch up as many
publications as possible.

As a PhD student only \~6 years ago, no one ever spoke to me about Open
Science, or any of the technologies that make so feasible now. I was
aware of people starting to use R from on-line message boards, although
I was encouraged to work in IDL. I was essentially given a print-out of
basic commands, access to a shared floating licence (one shared by the
whole department), and sent on my way. I had virtually no awareness
about scientific computing tools or reproducible Science. Hence my road
towards creating work like this was long, and much effort was certainly
wasted on ineffective/inefficient practices. Happily now, the landscape
has changed dramatically in only a short time for young researchers,
with organisations like [Software
Carpentry](http://software-carpentry.org) really making a difference.
Now, when I talk to new PhD students or older Professors, even if they
don't use Open Source languages or version control tools, they know they
exist, and they are seeing how invaluable computer science literacy can
be for their own research.

The link to the repo is
[here](https://github.com/benlaken/Composite_methods_LC13). Note when
launching the notebook from Binder, it may take around 30 seconds for
the notebook to load up, as it is fairly large.

</div>

</div>
