Title: Saharan dust over the North Atlantic
Date: 2015-05-29 09:48
Category: Post
Slug: calima
Author: Benjamin Laken
Email: benlaken@gmail.com
Tags: Aerosols, Climate, Statistics, Remote Sensing


Between 2010 and 2014 I was a postdoc at the Instituto de Astrofísica de
Canarias on the island of Tenerife of the [Canary
Archipelago](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canary_Islands). From time to
time, we would experience extreme climate events known locally as
Calima. These are periods where mineral dust from the Sahara, exported
in discrete and often-dramatic outbreak events, are suspended in the
air. The Calima conditions last from hours to days. During this time
dramatic changes occur in the local climate.

![](./theme/images/terra.png)

Terra MODIS false colour image of a strong Calima event over the Canary
Islands

Although like most aerosols, mineral dust increases the Earth’s
reflectance of short-wave radiation, the dust also absorbs radiation –
i.e. the dust both reflects and absorbs short-wave radiation, the
specific proportions with which it does so are determined by a variety
of factors such as the angle of incidence, and surface properties of the
mineral dust grains. As a result of the dusts radiative impact, air
containing the suspended dust is hotter than it would otherwise be.
Consequently, when Calima is present, air temperature increases with
height in the troposphere, creating an inversion: normally at the
latitudes of the Canary Islands, air temperature decreases through the
troposphere until the tropopause (around 10 km above sea level). Indeed,
in the same way the temperature boundary between the troposphere and
stratosphere traps the Earth’s weather systems within the troposphere,
the miniature and localised temperature inversions associated with the
Calima trap the hot, windless air over the Canary Islands – normally a
rather unpleasant experience for their ~2,120,000 inhabitants.

Calima is interesting, as, far from being a phenomenon of merely
localised impacts, the transport of Saharan mineral dust westwards over
the North Atlantic (and indeed in many other directions) actually has
impacts across the globe. Perhaps of most note is the dusts role in
maintaining primary-productivity over the Amazon basin – dust from the
Sahara is a crucial fertiliser to the Amazon rainforest. The dust not
only fertilisers terrestrial photosynthesises, but also primary
productivity of oceans: algal blooms resulting from mineral dust
fertilisation are visible from space, and constitute a significant
element of the global ecosystem. There are also more diverse and curious
impacts of the dust, ranging from the creation of the ominously titled
blood-rain; to influences on soil development around the world; or
providing the rare type of particles able to act as Ice Forming Nuclei
in clouds found to be influential as far away as Alaska; the dust has
even been indirectly linked to the death of coral in the Caribbean by
providing a vector for spores producing Sea Fan disease.

![](./theme/images/Haboob.png)

A dramatic Haboob over Arizona, USA - much dust is entrained over the
Sahara by similar Haboobs over Africa. These occur seasonally in
association with the movement of the Inter Tropical Discontinuity over
the Saharan region. The resulting formation of mesoscale convective
systems and associated cold tongues generates Haboobs. Image credit
Daniel Bryant

Although the Sahara and Sahel of North Africa is the largest source of
mineral dust, which, itself is the largest constituent of the global
aerosol burden by mass, there was relatively little known about it until
recently. This is changing following the efforts of scientists in
numerous monitoring campaigns such as SAMUM ([the SAharan Mineral dUst
experiMent](http://samum.tropos.de/)) and the [Fennec
project](http://fennec.ouce.ox.ac.uk/). Following successes of such
campaigns and other studies, scientists have pinpointed key regions
important to the entrainment of dust over the Sahara, and the mechanisms
by which the dust is entrained and exported and eventually deposited.

![](./theme/images/Meteosat.png)

The immense scale of the dust outbreaks can be appreciated from 36,000
km above the Earth, courtesy of the thermal infra-red (IR) channel from
Meteosat 3~rd~ generation satellite platform (taken on 03/03/2004). A
strong dust outbreak event is visible over North Africa as white
(relatively low IR emission) region against the darker (high IR
emission) land surface. Image from NEODAAS Dundee Satellite Receiving
Station, credit EUMETSAT/NERC/Dundee University.

Monitoring dust export events from the Sahara can be performed by
through ground-based measurements, satellite observations, or
palaeoclimatic reconstructions. All of these methods have different
benefits and limitations. Recently, in [a
paper](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/qj.2170/abstract)
published in the Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
I have used nightly optical extinction data taken from the Carlsberg
Meridian Telescope located on La Palma recorded over an approximately 30
year period to reconstruct the summertime Calima frequency experienced
at the Canary Islands. These data show that in summer months between
1983 and 1997 Calima went from occurring around 50% of the time to only
around 10% of the time; then for the remaining period of data (2000 –
2012), the summertime Calima showed no long term trend, essentially
remaining consistent around 15% of the time, with year-to-year
variations of around 20%. An update to this work should be forthcoming
with improved data.

Frequency of Calima events (%) during the high dust season months
(July–September),from 1984 to 2012. These data were derived from optical
extinction measurements made *in situ* at the Island of La Palma.
Adapted from Figure 6 of [Laken et al.
2013.](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/qj.2170/abstract)

Analysis of the variations in summer time Calima occurrence in relation
to a variety of climate indexes showed that the majority (~50%) of the
observed variations in summertime Calima experienced annually are linked
to changes in the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) occurring around
10-months earlier; this was likely due to a connection between the NAO
and rainfall anomalies over North Africa, as moisture reduces the amount
of dust for several reasons. Previous studies of Saharan dust outbreaks
over the Canary Islands using different datasets and focusing on other
times of the year have also shown statistical associations to the NAO.
This result is not so surprising, as it is logical that the weather over
the Atlantic should have a significant impact on the properties (e.g.
if, how, when, and where) dust may be exported from the African
continent over the North Atlantic region. However, the exact mechanisms
which link variations in the NAO 10-months earlier to summertime Calima
experienced at specific regions (such as the Canary Islands) are
currently unclear, and are certainly a subject for further study.
