Title: Scientist, opine thyself
Date: 2015-08-12 08:45
Category: Post
Slug: Opine-post
Tags: Communication, Advocacy, Research
Author: Benjamin Laken
Email: benlaken@gmail.com
Summary: Should scientists advocate?

![](./images/advc.jpg)

### The issue

Scientists as advocates. Should Scientists step outside of their
archetypal roles as dispassionate investigators of the physical world,
taking time away from asking questions of how things are, and instead
offer opinions on how they think things should be? Is this a moral
obligation? Or is it simply dangerous irresponsible territory beyond
their purview? Should we just be good little investigators and know our
place? Or in fact, are these the wrong questions to ask, devoid of the
nuance and perhaps ironically implying that even needing to ask it begs
only the answer, 'when you grow up'.

In Cosmos, Carl Sagan, and later his spiritual successor, [Neil deGrasse
Tyson](https://twitter.com/neiltyson?lang=en), both passionately
discussed not only scientific facts but also issues of contemporary
importance. For Carl Sagan, who made the original Cosmos during the Cold
War, the main issue of the day was nuclear proliferation. While more
recently, Neil deGrasse Tyson rightly honed in on the dangers of
environmental damage and Climate Change. This is advocacy, no two ways
about it, but what does that really entail, and what kind of discussion
is currently going on in the climate community about advocacy?

### What is advocacy?

In a 2013 [AGU
talk](http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2013/12/agu-talk-on-science-and-advocacy/#ITEM-16540-0)
Professor Gavin Schmidt of NASA states that advocacy is 'the defence of
your value positions'. The idea is that a scientist has a factual view
of reality, arrived at through the scientific method and the portion of
accumulated scientific knowledge of which they are aware. This
information is mixed with our own personal biases and leads us to arrive
at a set of values we perceive to be important. Advocacy is then an
expression of these values.

(I note that Gavin's talk mainly revolves around the ideas of the late
[Professor Stephen
Schneider](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Schneider), a profound
thinker on this subject. For those interested in reading more on this
topic, his work [Science advocate an
Oxymoron?](http://stephenschneider.stanford.edu/Publications/PDF_Papers/Oxymoron1.pdf)
is a must.)

Another definition, following the article of [Nelson and Vucetich
(2009)](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1523-1739.2009.01250.x/abstract),
*On Advocacy by Environmental Scientists: What, Whether, Why, and How‚Äù*,
argues that we may consider all communication of science not expressly
for relaying our work to colleagues a form of advocacy. So any
popularization of science (like [I Fucking Love
Science](http://www.iflscience.com)) is advocacy, just in an
uncontroversial form. The type of advocacy that is controversial, and is
the kind I wish to discuss, is defined by Nelson and Vucetich as
'promoting, developing, or assessing policy positions'. Given this, as
[Nelson
explains](http://bigthink.com/age-of-engagement/do-scientists-have-a-special-responsibility-to-engage-in-political-advocacy),
the more appropriate question is not, if advocacy is appropriate, but
*"which kinds of advocacy are acceptable and, most importantly, how
ought we to go about advocacy and how ought we as a scientific community
react to advocacy"*.

### Some recent views

There have been clear voices against advocacy however, particularly in
relation to the climate community, often centring around arguments of
bias, impartiality, and ethics that suggest it is problematic for
scientists to express views beyond communicating their science. Such
ideas can be found in one form or another in [a Guardian article by
Tasmin
Edwards](http://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2013/jul/31/climate-scientists-policies),
or many others including [Doug
McNeall](https://dougmcneall.wordpress.com/2014/01/30/why-i-dont-advocate-for-climate-science-policy/),
[Virginia Burkett](http://www.eenews.net/stories/1059993695), and
[Judith
Curry](http://judithcurry.com/2013/12/22/rethinking-climate-advocacy/).
Even Brian Cox, someone I much admire as a science communicator, has
clearly stated that scientists should not advocate (e.g. see 15:46 of
[Gavin's video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?t=952&v=CJC1phPS6IA)), and
has also stated that *"Advocacy has damaged trust in the science"*.

Even the Royal Society has had issues with the idea that advocacy should
not be part of science, with a group of 43 members, led by [Andrew
Montford](http://www.desmogblog.com/andrew-montford), attacking the
outspoken stance of their leaders on climate change. The dissenting
members published a report in 2012 entitled [*Nullus in
verba*](http://www.thegwpf.org/images/stories/gwpf-reports/montford-royal_society.pdf)
(the motto of the Society, which I take as simply an admonishment to
remain sceptical). The report essentially chided the society for
straying away from what they saw as pure science, arguing that the
society has lost its way by engaging in advocacy. It is certainly true
that the RS has somewhat cornered itself by advertising in The
Philosophical Transactions (1753) that *"...it is an established rule of
the Society, to which they will always adhere, never to give their
opinion as a Body upon any subject either of Nature or Art, that comes
before them"*. Perhaps this is a case where a 262 year old idea doesn't
perfectly map onto the modern era, or something crazy like that. (I
would certainly not criticize the RS for being out of date in general
though, as, to my mind they are doing great work in encouraging Open
Science, and I am personally very excited to see how their new [Open
Science journal](http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org) will develop.)

In essence, Montford's group are dancing around the idea that advocacy
puts the credibility of organizations and scientists at risk. A
[post](http://www.sheffieldscienceinpolicy.com/blog/should-scientists-be-advocates-by-dr-aaron-thierry)
by Dr Aaron Thierry offers a point that ideologically opposes this which
I agree with, that it is in-fact bad science, not advocacy, that
threatens trust in scientists.

Either-way, the facts on the ground show clearly that the majority of
public and also scientists support scientists voicing their opinions: [A
Pew Research Poll in
2009](http://www.people-press.org/2009/07/09/section-4-scientists-politics-and-religion/)
showed that a large majority of the public in the USA (76%), and nearly
all scientists (97%), think that it is appropriate for scientists to
become actively involved in political debates on controversial issues.
Despite these numbers I think that there is still disagreement in the
community as to what manner and extent of advocacy is appropriate.

### The personal element

To get an idea of what the dialogue between scientists looks like on
this topic for example you can see this twitter conversation [from Gavin
Schmidt](https://twitter.com/ClimateOfGavin/status/344458000091713538).
Speaking from experience I would say that most climate scientists are
motivated by much more than just scientific curiosity. Many are at their
heart idealists, motivated by a wish to create a sustainable future for
mankind and ensure a biodiverse and healthy planet. So the idea that
climate scientists should concern themselves only with carrying out and
reporting research, not attempting to participate and shape public and
political discussions seems incompatible with this idealism.

An obvious but key point is that scientists are citizens, and as [Nelson
states in an
interview](http://bigthink.com/age-of-engagement/do-scientists-have-a-special-responsibility-to-engage-in-political-advocacy),
*"...citizens in a democracy have a moral obligation to actively promote
within their society that which they are justified in thinking is right
or good and to actively opposing that which they are justified in
thinking is wrong or bad. Consequently, because they are citizens, every
scientist has an obligation to be just and transparently honest
advocates."*.

Nelson goes on to capture the essence of what I previously mentioned
when I said that personal bias interacts with scientific understanding
(and vice versa) to shape our values and advocacy, when he states: *"If
I admittedly and intrinsically value that which I study, and if in my
study of it I discover threats to it, I think the leap to my willingness
to act on its behalf is hardly a leap at all."*.

### The damage

So what is the harm with advocacy anyway? In my own background, I was
exposed to the idea that advocacy is a form of bias -- a lack of
impartiality -- and is consequently antithetical to Science. Moreover,
as I mentioned worries have been voiced that advocacy damages the
reputation of scientists in general. But I see this as a non-issue: to a
scientist, bias has a specific meaning, markedly different from everyday
use. In the world of science, impartial means limiting bias in
experimental design and analysis, an integral process in science.
Carefully designing hypothesis and experiments so that we, 'don't fool
ourselves', as [Richard Fenymann (approximately) put
it](http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/r/richardpf137642.html).
However, in common use, and particularly in relation to divided
political issues, to be impartial means something else entirely:
neutrality. These definitions are not compatible, and conflating them
through linguistic sleight is a mistake, because it is fantasy to think
that scientists are neutral.

For the [overwhelming
majority](https://www.skepticalscience.com/global-warming-scientific-consensus.htm)
of climate scientists who agree with the conclusions of the IPCC, I
would not for a moment believe that they are impartial with regards to
questions of emission regulation or divestment in non-renewable
resources. On this matter [Stephen Schneider
said](http://stephenschneider.stanford.edu/Publications/PDF_Papers/Oxymoron1.pdf)
that we all have value positions, and it is our responsibility to make
them conscious and explicit. Similarly, in his AGU talk, Gavin Schmidt
echoed this point, stating *'Many believe in pretence of complete
objectivity, and remain entirely neutral. Not true, how matter how hard
we strive.'*.

Another argument presented against advocacy implicitly appears in
[Tasmin Edwards Guardian
piece](http://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2013/jul/31/climate-scientists-policies),
relating to perceived scientific authority and the potential dangers of
promoting values from such a position. (Think of the psychological
effect of the 'authority figure in the white coat' from the [Milgrim
experiments](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milgram_experiment).) Without
wanting to put words in her mouth, I assume that Edwards is being
cautious of coercing potentially sheep-like minds with views that she
recognizes as originating from her own values with perceived authority.
I find it hard to worry too much on this point however, as the
intentions of the climate community are to avert global catastrophe.
Thus it seems to make little difference in this case if people are
convinced out of trust/deference to a Milgrim-like authority figure, or
because they understand the physical arguments. More importantly though,
I think that there *is* a clear and recognisable distinction between the
scientist speaking, the scientific evidence they present, and the
opinions/recommendations they give.

If we consider a scientist simply as a person who understands and
practices the scientific method, acknowledging that just like all people
they possess their own biases. And we consider Science itself to be the
application of critical tests to ideas with the aim of arriving at an
understanding of the material world. Then it seems quite plain that just
because a scientist speaks in a public forum, does not mean they speak
for Science (*nullus in verba*). They can communicate the fruits of
scientific labour and comment on them, but the spectre that they may
speak with the authority of Science, forever damaging the reputation of
scientists is misplaced.

For a view from the ground, my friend and colleague, [Hans
Brenna](https://twitter.com/hansbrenna), a climate researcher currently
investigating the role of volcanoes on stratospheric chemistry, believes
that the logical result of arguments against advocacy are a slippery
slope. Leading to the conclusion that if scientists are unable to
advocate based on their understanding of scientific results and their
own values, then no experts or person with competence in a field should
be allowed to advocate based on their understanding of that field. He
argues that this creates nonsensical results, making enlightened
advocacy and public debate impossible. He suggests that the origin of
this objection is most beneficial to a [general PR campaign against
climate
scientists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_denial),
encouraging politicians and public alike to ignore the advice of climate
science. Hans says *"I'm afraid that if it succeeds on us, it will be
brought to bear on other controversial topics in the future"*.

### The conclusion

Aside from being unrealistic, general calls to limit the advocacy of
scientists may be detrimental or even destructive, by encouraging the
removal of the voices of people who have the clearest understanding of
the world and climate change from the public discussion.

As a final example, let's say you were sitting in a burning house, but
for some reason you are unsure if the house is really burning (perhaps
too much Descartes before bed). You call a scientist, who promptly
arrives to determine if the house really is on fire. After doing the
appropriate test, the scientist tells you that with a &gt;99.9%
probability the house, is, indeed on fire. He then hastens to add you
should leave before you burn alive, as he considers that this would be
undesirable. The difference between the scientific conclusion, and the
policy advice should be clear. Is it inherently problematic for the
scientist to suggest a course of action? Or rather, is it their moral
imperative if they believe that your burning alive would be a bad thing?

I think that only a moral relativist could object to the above, as it
would require arguing that it is wrong to assume simply because the
scientist in my story does not wish to burn alive that they presume you
would also value this outcome.

After considering this issue, I would say that the question of should
scientists advocate is invalid, as, unless we wish to communicate via
raw data, advocacy in some form is unavoidable. After acknowledging that
all scientists are individually free to advocate or not as they wish,
the real question is how to do so responsibly and ethically. I believe
this comes down to the individuals making their value judgements clear.
Again, Professor Stephen Schneider has already [lucidly outlined these
points](http://stephenschneider.stanford.edu/Publications/PDF_Papers/Oxymoron1.pdf)
years ago.
