Title: Helping at the Software Carpentry course Oslo June 2--3rd
Date: 2015-06-05 08:12
Category: Post
Slug: swc_oslo_2015
Tags: Software Carpentry, Teaching
Author: Benjamin Laken
Email: benlaken@gmail.com
Summary: First experience with Software Carpentry in Oslo

![](./theme/images/swc_oslo.jpeg)

Helping at the [Software Carpentry](http://software-carpentry.org)
course, June 2--3rd Oslo run by [Lex
Nederbragt](https://twitter.com/lexnederbragt)[](), certainly gave me a
lot to consider. The two-day course taught novice users Bash, Git, and
Python ([Jupyter Notebook](https://jupyter.org)). Three invaluable and
complimentary tools which are the centre of my own work-flow. I was
excited to see how people were introduced to these tools and the
Software Carpentry teaching methods. The collaborative [Git-based lesson
materials](http://software-carpentry.org/lessons.html) are especially
nice, and I can only hope this teaching model spreads far and wide. I
certainty appreciated running through the course material, and in
particular I don't remember seeing a clearer introduction to Git and
Bash.

Myself, I stumbled into the use of Bash, Git and Python one-by-one over
time and learned alone through a lot of trial-and-error (and Youtube)
over a relatively long period of time. So I was quite curious to see how
the students would absorb so much information so quickly, and if it
would really change the way they intend to work in the future. The
students were very competent, and I got the feeling that they quickly
realized the possibilities for these tools. In fact there was very
little for the helpers to do, as the students (and even their computers)
were all operating excellently!

The Software Carpentry Information for helpers and teaching instructions
was superb, and certainly gave me a few things to consider. I had seen
[Greg Wilson](https://twitter.com/gvwilson), the creator of Software
Carpentry talk about some of the ideas underpinning the group on Youtube
([for example see here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q7wyA2lbPaU)),
and had been meaning to follow his suggested readings on the subject of
teaching (such as [How learning Works by Susan Ambrose et
al](http://www.amazon.com/How-Learning-Works-Research-Based-Principles/dp/0470484101)).
Following the course recommendations about the use of language and
computer etiquette to students was a valuable experience: for example,
not using the word 'just' (as they consider that it immediately sets a
tone of inaccessibility), and not taking-over keyboards when students
run into trouble or using short-cuts to fix problems. These were quite
an adjustment at first, as without being aware of it, these actions were
definitely my default setting ("Ah, a problem? You should just do thing
x! \*\*while I type a blur of short-cut keys\*\*" - I can see how that
might be sub-optimal for student-learning...). So I immediately felt
making the small changes the course suggested forced me into a much more
user-friendly state for the students!

To improve the course though, I think that I would have tried to
emphasise some real-world use cases from the Jupyter Notebook. As, even
if the students can't understand yet how they were built, they would at
least see what is be possible. For me at least, seeing people working at
a high-level in these tools was a big motivation for self-improvement,
as I realised that these were the tools that could take your work to a
new level and were the tools worth investing time in learning. By only
presenting a simplified use cases I got the feeling that although
everyone probably left with a good handle on what was covered, perhaps
they were still largely unaware of the possibilities in Python and the
Jupyter Notebook for Open Science, which for me is the most interesting
and exciting part.
